---
title: A Date with Eternity
lesson: Be cheerful in the face of adversity
---

I was in my junior year of the engineering program at Brigham Young
University when my student ward decided to organize a climb to the top
of Mount Timpanogos near Provo, Utah. It was in the spring of 1978. The
snow was gone from the mountain, but the weather was still a little
unpredictable. Our group of hardy adventurers was composed of fellow
students, most of whom were good friends. We set out one fine evening
and took our sleeping bags with us to the trail head at the base of the
mountain. We planned to sleep under the stars and arise at about 4am to
get an early start up the mountain.

Lori and I were seriously dating at the time, but we were not yet
engaged to be married. We both looked forward to sharing the experience
of climbing the mountain together. The trail was not extremely rugged,
but the distance to the peak was considerable, at about 7 miles. When
4am arrived, we all embarked together, anxious to meet the challenge of
conquering a worthy mountain peak.

Until the sun came up, we had to be careful where we placed our feet on
the trail because of the darkness. Soon, however, the sun began to rise
and the beauties of the mountain became visible. The day started
gloriously and appeared to be likely to offer just the right conditions
for a day of hiking. Unfortunately, our luck began to rapidly change.
Before we had arrived at the peak, the clouds began to thicken and it
started to rain. Our group decided to avoid taking any greater risks in
the poor weather and chose to abandon our goal to reach the top of the
mountain. It was a long, cold march in the rain as we trudged back down
the muddy trail. The mood was a bit somber because our lofty goal had
been demolished by the weather. We were all quite soaked by the rain and
thoroughly cold and miserable.

It was under these rather dismal conditions when an impression began to
form in my mind. This impression would have eternal consequences. I
began to understand how adversity can often reveal a person's true
nature. I observed how Lori reacted to our present unfavorable
circumstances and was quite impressed with how well she held up under
the trial. She looked like a half-drowned cat, but remained cheerful and
determined to stay positive. She didn't utter a single complaint or
allow her mood to turn sour. I realized that her strength of character
would be a valuable trait in an eternal companion. I began to realize
how much I needed this kind of influence in my life. The impression grew
and matured until I asked her to marry me a few months later. That day
on the mountain, I may have lost the contest with nature, but I found my
soul-mate. She has been my main source of joy and comfort ever since.
