---
title: Survival Journal - Week 4
---

Non-journal comment: Week 4 consisted of a forced march on Monday and
Student Expedition the remainder of the week. Student Expeditions are
smaller than group expeditions. There were about three students in each
group.

The staff finally came at 7:30 Sunday Morning. We held a short
Priesthood meeting and then had our fast and testimony meeting. It
lasted for three hours and the spirit was strong. We had to use berries
for the Sacrament.

At 12:30 they passed out food to each family group. First, we devoured a
watermelon. Then we whomped up some oatmeal and lumpy dick to last us
until dinner. Dinner was fried chicken, cooked vegetables, and cinnamon
ash cakes. I was so full of oatmeal that I could hardly eat the dinner
and soon after my Revenge started again.

At 7:00 we had a meeting at which it was announced that our forced march
would begin that night at midnight. We were to hike 25 miles to Eggnog
Cabin as fast as we could. I wasn't exactly overjoyed but slept for a
few hours with my bedroll rolled and ready to go. The gun went off at
12:30 when the moon was out to light the way. Everybody took off; some
began to run, and I was doing fine in second place

when the Revenge struck a powerful blow. I lost 4 places and most of my
will power. I began again with cramps in my stomach. It was an endlessly
long, spooky walk through ghostly, moonlit desert canyons and mesas.
After a while, my pains eased, and I settled into a steady pace. At 6:30
I watched an incredibly beautiful sunrise and I think I learned a very
deep appreciation of desert scenery. At 7:30 Lynn, Ted and I all walked
into Eggnog together and first. We had covered 25 miles in seven hours
of hard pushed hiking. I thought my legs were going to fall off and I
grew some prize-winning blisters, but I was there and happy. I am now
resting in the shade. Kids have been coming in all morning. Most of them
were in by 10, but some of those poor kids are still out in the desert
at 12:30. It's very hot here in the shade and I hate to imagine what
those poor kids are going through. Kelly came in about 7 pm and Doug
came in with a crutch and bad back at 10 pm.

Monday night we made preparations for student expedition week. This is a
period of 4-5 days where small groups of students are sent out on their
own with maps and faith to cover 50-70-mile distances. Ted, Kelly and I
are one of the groups. We were given food packs for the week and then
each group met individually with the staff to discuss their expedition.
We had a final fireside for instructions before we separated.

Some groups left as early as 4 am Tuesday morning, but ours didn't leave
until 7:30. Kelly was still exhausted from the forced march and the
going was extremely slow. We finally reached the first water drop 8
miles out of camp at 11:30. There were three other groups there too,
some with ill members. We all planned to wait there at the water drop
until about 4 in the afternoon when it cooled off a little. When the
time came to leave, we found that there was barely enough water for half
a pop can apiece. The nearest water ahead was 20 miles away and we were
quite worried. Ted had begun to feel a little sick during the afternoon
rest and Kelly was still tired. Since I was the only one with much
energy left, I decided to walk two miles back to an old reservoir for
water. I carried two canteens and two billy cans and arrived at the
reservoir in 40 minutes. I got back at 5:45 and found Ted writhing in
pain. The rest

of the groups had left, so I was alone and quite helpless to do
anything. Kelly and I gave Ted a blessing and set up camp since it was
obvious that we would not be moving anymore that day. A car came by, but
the most they could do for us was give us some good drinking water for
Ted.

Wednesday Morning Ted is feeling a little better, but he is still very
sick. Our water is getting low and I am getting very worried. We are
very far behind schedule now. I have no idea then we will be able to
move or if help will ever come if it is needed. There is nothing I can
do but pray out here in the middle of the desert. Frankly, I am a bit
frustrated and discouraged.

The back-up truck finally came by to pick up their water buckets at
2:30. They were very surprised to see us still there and asked what the
problem was. After examining Ted and talking to him for a long while he
decided to continue on with Kelly and me. They told him he should depend
totally upon the Lord to help him face this great physical challenge.
They filled our canteens and said goodbye once again. We finally left at
4 pm. even though Ted was in considerable pain. We had to walk some 16
miles that afternoon to the next water and expected to be walking far
into the night. It was nearly 10 pm when we made it to the junction
where the water drop was. To our surprise, two of the other boys groups
were there too. Ted was feverish and quite exhausted from our long
uphill climb that day. I certainly admire his courage and determination.
During the course of our walking, we crossed Capital Reef National Park
and climbed the switchbacks to the petrified wood junction.

I must tell you about a desert thundershower we encountered along the
way. First, the air becomes very still, and you see these huge billowy
clouds come rolling in. Then, the wind begins to blow in violent little
gusts, and you can smell that newly wetted dirt smell in the air. Next,
you watch a sparkling sheet of rain roll toward you and before you know
it you are enveloped in a downpour of huge warm rain drops while the sun
is still shining and making the wet desert rocks glisten. It's all over
in about 20 minutes and the desert becomes as dry as it was before.

Thursday morning, we cooked a delicious lentil and dog food (TVP) stew.
We left camp at 10 a.m. Ted\'s condition was somewhat improved, and we
made good progress. We followed the Petrified Wood road to the Veda Mine
Road. Then we finally entered Wolverine Canyon where we shortly
discovered a beautiful little spring and made camp at 5 pm. We arrived
in very good spirits and had greatly enjoyed each other\'s company and
the terrain that day. I was filling the role of head cook which I
greatly enjoyed. We had a big pot of cracked wheat and milk with brown
sugar. We finally retired after a good long fireside chat. It is very
difficult to explain just how much I am enjoying my student expedition
now that everything is going so well. My feet are fine, the revenge is
gone, the food is quite good and we have not even been worried about
where we are or whether we will have water yet. It's all just so great,
and sadly enough drawing to a close.

Friday morning, we broke camp early because we had a long way to go
before the day was over. We followed Wolverine into Horse Canyon. There
we traveled most of the day through high walled canyons and dry
riverbeds. Towards evening we started to follow the Kings Bench trail,
hoping to find a cattle trough of water as our camping spot. We found it
at the base of a steeply ascending canyon at 5 pm. Our meal was lumpy
dick over TVP (texturized vegetable protein) and it was very good. We
expected to make the last leg of our journey up the ravine and over
King\'s Bench tomorrow morning. When we arrive at Base Camp in the
Gulch, we will have traveled somewhere around 250 miles. Our student
expedition alone was in excess of 50 miles I believe. The last mileage
we will have to cover from the Gulch will be our 12-mile run in to
Boulder from the Gulch after solo.

Sunday\-- Ah, solo is so peaceful and relaxing, but that's getting ahead
of myself; back to where I left off.

Saturday morning, we rose and had a leisurely breakfast. We napped a
little before breaking camp and were in no hurry to leave because we
anticipated a short hike into base camp. Leaving at 9:30, we started the
steep ascent up the ravine which led to Kings Bench. It took us an hour
of heavy panting to reach the top, but it was certainly worth it. From
the top you could see for miles in all directions.

In looking across the bench we could see Long Canyon. Long Canyon
branches off from the Gulch so we decided to drop into Long and follow
it to the Gulch. However, several attempts to descend ended in steep 200
ft. cliffs. Finally, we came to a point where we could see the entire
canyon. The whole thing was walled with cliffs and there was no way in.
It was nearly noon when we discovered this and it was getting very hot.
We had expected to be in base camp by noon so we hadn't carried much
water.

Worry started to furrow our brows, but we decided to bear southwest and
try to enter the Gulch through a long narrow canyon. We hiked for
several hours and entered the top of the narrow canyon. We came upon a
water pot which had hundreds of polywogs and little green flecks. I
drank my fill anyway because of my thirst.

The going was pretty tough and several times appeared to be foiled by
drop-offs. Each time we would discover a ledge or a crack in the wall
which would let us pass. Finally, as we followed a ledge we came into
view of the Gulch and shortly found a way down. We came joyfully walking
into base camp soon after. It felt like a long-awaited home-coming to
see our leaders and those cheerful girls again. All the girls groups
were already there, but we were the first boys group to arrive at about
5 pm. When we got there the girls were rappelling down a 150-foot cliff.
I was very anxious to rappel too, so we prepared our solo food packs and
were about to take the path up to the top of the cliff when misfortune
came.

Great storm clouds had moved in and it began to thunder and lightning.
Then the rains came in such floods that soon the whole canyon floor
began to flow. The lightning was spectacular, and the thunder was
deafening. Most of us were thoroughly soaked before long. I managed to
stay a little dry by standing under a little overhang. The storm passed
after about an hour, but it left behind a muddy mess. What was earlier a
cool, clear little canyon stream was now a muddy red little river. I had
visions of having to drink that stuff all through solo.

By this time the other boys groups had arrived and we began to organize
to go out on Solo. Those of us who hadn\'t gotten to rappel would do so
Wednesday after solo was over. We boys followed the leaders up the Gulch
where they left us one by one at our own little sites along the way. I
was given my site about 9 pm when the light was beginning to fade. It is
a little ledge about 30 feet above the creek. A large overhang juts out
over it and gives me just enough room to stand. From my little perch
here, I command a view of the stream below. Nothing can pass below me
without my notice.
