---
title: Tree Frog Sabotage
---

Life Lesson: Give the knot-heads the benefit of the doubt. They may have
a good reason for their behavior.

I was really irritated. Most of my friends kid me about being able to
detect a mood change. Lori tells me that the best indicator to her is my
eyebrows. If one eyebrow twitches, I\'ve had a mood swing. If both of
them have moved, watch out! On this occasion, I suspect both of my
eyebrows were scrunched into an angry V over my livid eyes. Let me
explain the cause of so great an emotion in my normally calm and
controlled demeanor.

I suppose I was expecting some kind of a miracle. For the last two
years, the heat pump that cools our house in the summer and warms it in
the winter had been on the fritz. As winter approached in the Fall of
2017, I was hoping that perhaps the heat pump would miraculously heal
itself. It was working just fine all during the summer. We enjoyed a
pleasant 75 degrees in the house even when it was 102 degrees outside. I
thought that maybe, just maybe, there was a clog in the pipes that
managed to clear itself and the heating season would be as pleasant as
the cooling season.

I had told the guy that comes to do a tune-up of the heat pump every
year that it was acting up during the winter months. If the outside
temperature ever dips below 40 degrees, the heap pump gets all clogged
up with ice. Sometimes it was so bad that it looked like a big snowball
sitting beside our house. The technician said we needed a new \"defrost
control board\". It would only cost mere \$450 to get it replaced. I was
skeptical because they are just like auto mechanics. They can use a few
buzz words from the mysterious HVAC language and convince you to spend
thousands of dollars needlessly.

So, my hopes were up that this year would be different. I wouldn\'t have
to turn the heat pump off every few days to let it thaw out. I wouldn\'t
have to face \$300-a-month heating bills that totally wrecked the
budget. On the morning after the first night when the temperature had
dipped below 40 degrees in late October, I anxiously walked over to the
heat pump to inspect it. Rats!! It was full of ice. Hence my extreme
irritation.

However, I was determined to avoid the killer repair bill, so I started
doing a little research on-line. As luck would have it, I found a
replacement circuit board on eBay for a mere 50 bucks. I figured it was
worth the risk to save \$400, so I bought it. A few days later the board
arrived. It\'s a tiny little thing that probably cost some company in
China 2 dollars to make, but I still had high hopes of winning this
little personal war with \"the system\".

I removed the old board and set it aside for closer inspection later.
After the repair was complete, I gathered up my tools and brought the
old board into the house to take a closer look. The front of the circuit
board looked totally normal, but when I turned the board over to look at
the back side, I saw something remarkable that explained why I had
endured so much misery and worry for the last two years. The board was
discolored and stained. It was quite corroded and nasty looking. In the
middle of the mess was a dried-up tree frog. His little body had
shriveled up to about the size of a raisin, but his little legs stuck
out straight like toothpicks with feet. I took a picture to enshrine the
culprit for time and all eternity in my personal history.

![https://process.filestackapi.com/Ai3B5YJwSuyaXbwhz5Zxzz/rotate=deg:exif/resize=fit:max,width:1274,height:2100/https:/cdn.filestackcontent.com/fJWYAnQT3S7o5o2PC7ow](md/38_Tree_Frog_Sabotage-media/media/image1.jpeg){width="6.635416666666667in"
height="2.46875in" alt=""}

I can just imagine his surprise when he crawled behind my defrost
control board and caused a short circuit that cost him his life. The
surge of electricity through his moist little froggy body caused his
legs to fully extend and he has been frozen in this stance ever since.

After pondering over this little surprise for a while, I realized there
are a few life lessons captured in the experience. I was mad at a lot of
folks over the trouble and expense this little incident had caused me. I
desperately wanted to blame someone or something for my troubles. I was
ready to point the finger at just about anything that I could imagine.
When I saw the toasted little tree frog, I realized he was not an evil
saboteur who wanted to make my life miserable. He was just a poor little
critter who wanted a warm place to spend the winter. There was no
sinister plot to destroy my peace of mind. It was all in my head. I
would have been better off to assume there was a perfectly innocent
explanation for the problem and I didn\'t need to look for the guilty
party upon which to heap my scorn and righteous indignation. I think
this attitude would be a better choice for most of life\'s unpleasant
surprises. Note to self\....

I also had a great reminder of the reality of the law of opposition in
all things. The next morning when I went to check on the heat pump, I
found that it was once again working perfectly. My elation knew no
bounds. I was reminded of the scripture in Alma 36:21.

\"Yea, I say unto you, my son, that there could be nothing so exquisite
and so bitter as were my pains. Yea, and again I say unto you, my son,
that on the other hand, there can be nothing so exquisite and sweet as
was my joy.\"

So, there you have it. Another day, another truly amazing lesson. Who
would believe it was taught to me by a lowly tree frog.
